  * Skip to primary navigation <#genesis-nav-primary>
  * Skip to main content <#genesis-content>

Usability Geek <https://usabilitygeek.com/>

Usability Geek

Usability & User Experience (UX) Blog

Menu

  * Online Usability/UX Courses <https://www.interaction-design.org/?
    ep=usabilitygeek&utm_source=usabilitygeek&utm_medium=ug_header&utm_campaign=ug_3monthsfree>
  * Start Here     <https://usabilitygeek.com/start-here/>
  * Blog <https://usabilitygeek.com/landing-page/>
  * Show Search<#header-search-wrap>

Search this website

Hide Search<#>

You are here: Home <https://usabilitygeek.com/> / Reviews <https://
usabilitygeek.com/category/reviews/> / 10 Free Screen Readers For Blind
Or Visually Impaired Users


  10 Free Screen Readers For Blind Or Visually Impaired Users

By John Oldman <https://usabilitygeek.com/author/etesting/>

10 Free Screen Readers For Blind Or Visually Impaired Users

It is not difficult for a sighted person to imagine how being blind or
visually impaired could make using a computer difficult. Just close your
eyes and you will instantly experience that even processing text is
impossible – or impossible without additional software at least. Now a
range of software is available that can help to make using a computer an
easier, more enjoyable and more productive experience for blind or
visually impaired users.

For in-depth insights on /accessibility/ <https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/topics/accessibility?ep=ug0>, we recommend the
online course on /Accessibility/ <https://www.interaction-design.org/
courses/accessibility-how-to-design-for-all> at the/Interaction Design /
Foundation.


    Essential Software: A Screen Reader

A *screen reader* is an essential piece of software for a blind or
visually impaired person. Simply put, a screen reader transmits whatever
text is displayed on the computer screen into a form that a visually
impaired user can process (usually tactile, auditory or a combination of
both). While the most basic screen readers will not help blind users
navigate a computer, those with additional features can give people with
visual impairment much more independence.

Whilst most screen readers work by having a synthetic voice that reads
text aloud, others can also communicate data via a refreshable braille
display. Such screen readers make use of crystals that can expand when
exposed to particular voltage levels (thanks to a phenomenon known as
the Piezo Effect <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piezoelectricity>),
allowing visually impaired users to use their fingers to read the text
that is displayed on screen. But while screen-reading software can be
affordable, such hardware is usually very expensive.


    Free Software Makes ‘Universal’ Access a Reality

Many people could not afford the expensive price tag associated with
some of the more sophisticated screen readers. Luckily for them, there
are several screen reading software that are completely free. The
following is a list of free screen readers that one can download:

 1.


          *NVDA* <http://www.nvda-project.org/> (Windows)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-NVDA <http://
    www.nvda-project.org/>
    NVDA has been designed by a blind software engineering graduate,
    James Teh, for use with Windows computers. This free and open source
    screen reader has a synthetic voice that reads whatever the cursor
    hovers over, and can be used directly from a USB stick, making it
    ideal for students.

 2.


          *Serotek System Access* <https://www.satogo.com/en/> (Windows)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-Serotek-System-
    Access <https://www.satogo.com/en/>
    This downloadable and complete screen reader can be used even
    outside your browser, thus making it one of the quickest ways of
    getting a screen reader up and running on your system. Serotek
    offers extended versions for a fee, although it is much cheaper than
    other screen readers.

 3.


          *Apple VoiceOver* <http://www.apple.com/accessibility/
          voiceover/> (OS X)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-Apple-VoiceOver
    <http://www.apple.com/accessibility/voiceover/>
    Apple VoiceOver includes options to magnify, keyboard control and
    verbal descriptions in English to describe what is happening on
    screen. It also reads aloud file content as well as web pages, E-
    mail messages and word processing files whilst providing a
    relatively accurate narrative of the user’s workspace. This covers a
    wide array of keyboard commands that enable user//navigation/
    <https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/navigation-1?
    ep=ug0> /of the Mac OS X interface.

 4.


          *ORCA* <http://projects.gnome.org/orca/> (Linux)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-ORCA <http://
    projects.gnome.org/orca/>
    ORCA is a Linux based screen reader which has also been evolving for
    the past number of years. Although it is not the sole Linux-based
    screen reader, ORCA is definitely the most popular. Recently it has
    been included with the Ubuntu installation CD, and with a couple of
    initial key presses it allows blind people to have audible
    interaction during the installation process.

 5.


          *BRLTTY* <http://mielke.cc/brltty/> (Linux)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-BRLTTY <http://
    mielke.cc/brltty/>
    BRLTTY is a background process (daemon) which provides access to the
    Linux/Unix console (when in text mode) for a blind person using a
    refreshable braille display. It drives the braille display, and
    provides complete screen review functionality. Some speech
    capability has also been incorporated.

 6.


          *Emacspeak* <http://emacspeak.sourceforge.net/> (Linux)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-Emacspeak
    <http://emacspeak.sourceforge.net/>
    Emacspeak is a free speech interface and that allows visually
    impaired users to interact independently and efficiently with the
    computer. Its technology enables it to produce rich aural
    representation of electronic information. Emacspeak offers audible
    interface of the different aspects of the Internet such as browsing
    and messaging as well as local and remote information via a
    consistent and well-integrated user interface <https://
    www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/ui-design?ep=ug0>.

 7.


          *WebAnywhere* <http://webanywhere.cs.washington.edu/> (All
          OSs, Web browsers)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-WebAnywhere
    <http://webanywhere.cs.washington.edu/>
    WebAnywhere is a web-based screen reader for the web. It requires no
    special software to be installed on the client machine and,
    therefore, enables blind people to access the web from any computer
    they happen to have access to that has a sound card

 8.


          *Spoken Web* <http://www.spoken-web.com/index.cgi?p=download>
          (Internet Explorer)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-SpokenWeb
    <http://www.spoken-web.com/index.cgi?p=download>
    Spoken-Web is a Web portal, managing a wide range of online data-
    intensive content like news updates, weather, travel and business
    articles for computer users who are blind or visually impaired. The
    site provides a simple, easy-to-use interface for navigating between
    the different sections and articles. Using the keyboard to navigate,
    a person who is blind or who has a visual impairment can hear the
    full range of an article content provided in a logical, clear, and
    understandable manner.

 9.


          *ChromeVox* <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/
          kgejglhpjiefppelpmljglcjbhoiplfn> (Google Chrome)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-Google-ChromeVox
    <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/
    kgejglhpjiefppelpmljglcjbhoiplfn>
    Google ChromeVox is a Google Chrome screen reader extension for
    visually impaired users.

10.


          *ChromeVis* <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/
          halnfobaneppemjnonmmhngbfifnafgd> (Google Chrome)

    10-Free-Software-For-Visually-Impaired-Blind-Users-Google-ChromeVis
    <https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/
    halnfobaneppemjnonmmhngbfifnafgd>
    Google ChromeVis is a Google Chrome extension that magnifies any
    selected text on a webpage. The magnified text is displayed inside
    of a separate lens and preserves the original page layout. Users can
    change both the lens text/color /and the lens background /color/.


    Software for Work and Play

Such software is essential for blind users to read the content of web
pages or communicate with friends and colleagues. As more sophisticated
software has been made available to a larger audience, people have begun
turning their attention to developing leisure programs that are designed
with /accessibility/ <https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
topics/accessibility> in mind. For example, the website
blindsoftware.com <http://blindsoftware.com/> has an accessible mp3
player to download and a selection of games.


    Developing Software for Everyone

When it comes to universal access, several people with hearing or visual
impairments or illnesses have found that it can become a barrier to
using traditional software. The goal is to remove those perceived
barriers and help them be able to achieve results beyond their
imagination. This is why it is important that developers continue to
work on making software as accessible as they can for a wide range of
people, so everyone can benefit from the powerful tools computers offer.


      *Want to learn more?*

If you’d like to brush up on Accessibility and get practical skills on
the subject, then consider to take the online course on Accessibility
<https://www.interaction-design.org/courses/accessibility-how-to-design-
for-all?ep=ug0>. If, on the other hand, you want to go over the basics
of UX and Usability, you could take the online course on User Experience
<https://www.interaction-design.org/courses/user-experience-the-
beginner-s-guide?ep=ug0>. Good luck on your learning journey!

(Lead image: Depositphotos <https://depositphotos.com/>)

Filed Under: Reviews <https://usabilitygeek.com/category/reviews/>
Tagged With: Accessibility <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/accessibility/>


        About John Oldman

This post was written by John Oldman - a veteran software testing
engineer who works for a software testing company based in the UK.


    Get Started

Usability Geek is a blog that provides practical and useful insights
into topics like Usability, User Experience (UX), Human Computer
Interaction (HCI), Information Architecture (IA) and related fields.
Read more about us <https://usabilitygeek.com/about/>
Become an Author at UsabilityGeek.com <https://usabilitygeek.com/write-
for-usabilitygeek/>
Contact us <https://usabilitygeek.com/contact/>	


    POPULAR TOPICS

  * Usability <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/usability-2>
  * Usability Guidelines <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/usability-
    guidelines>
  * Usability Testing <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/usability-testing>
  * User Experience <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/user-experience>

  * Design Tools & Software <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/design-tools-
    software/>
  * Interface & Navigation <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/interface-
    navigation/>
  * Mobile & Tablet <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/mobile-tablet/>
  * Writing For The Web <https://usabilitygeek.com/tag/writing-for-the-
    web/>


    SOCIAL MEDIA CHANNELS

  * Twitter <https://twitter.com/usabilitygeek>
  * Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/UsabilityGeek>
  * Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/usabilitygeek/>
  * LinkedIn <https://www.linkedin.com/company/usabilitygeek/>
  * Pinterest <https://www.pinterest.com/usabilitygeek/>

© Copyright 2011-2021 UsabilityGeek · Privacy Notice <https://
usabilitygeek.com/privacy-policy> · Terms and Conditions <https://
usabilitygeek.com/terms-and-conditions/> ·

Copyright © 2024 Usability Geek

Like most websites, we use cookies. Cookie settingsACCEPT
Privacy & Cookies Policy
Close


        Privacy Overview

This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate
through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are
categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are as
essential for the working of basic functionalit...
Necessary Necessary
Always Enabled

Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function
properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic
functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do
not store any personal information.

SAVE & ACCEPT
